doc: Improve overlays section (#255132)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/using/overlays.chapter.md

# Overlays {#chap-overlays}

This chapter describes how to extend and change Nixpkgs using overlays.

TODO: Maybe add link to `lib.extends`/`lib.fix`

> ## What are overlays {#sec-overlays-definition}

Reviewer: I think the important question is "what can i do with overlays". The technical correct definition is not as important in the first sentence.

```suggestion
## What are overlays {#sec-overlays-definition}

Overlays can be used in general to extend or change existing attribute sets. Common applications are:

- Adding/extending packages to a locally imported version of nixpkgs
- Overriding packages
- Overriding packageSets

```

Overlays are Nix functions which accept two arguments, conventionally called `self` and `super`, and return a set of attributes. For example, the following is a valid overlay.

```nix
self: super:

{
  boost = super.boost.override {
    python = self.python3;
  };
  rr = super.callPackage ./pkgs/rr {
    stdenv = self.stdenv_32bit;
  };
}
```

> The first argument (`self`) corresponds to the final package set. You should use this set for the dependencies of all packages specified in your overlay. For example, all the dependencies of `rr` in the example above come from `self`, as well as the overridden dependencies used in the `boost` override.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first argument (`final`) corresponds to the final package set after all overlays have been applied. You should use this set for the dependencies of all packages specified in your overlay. For example, all the dependencies of `rr` in the example above come from `final`, as well as the overridden dependencies used in the `boost` override.
```

> The second argument (`super`) corresponds to the result of the evaluation of the previous stages of Nixpkgs. It does not contain any of the packages added by the current overlay, nor any of the following overlays. This set should be used either to refer to packages you wish to override, or to access functions defined in Nixpkgs. For example, the original recipe of `boost` in the above example, comes from `super`, as well as the `callPackage` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second argument (`prev`) corresponds to the result of the evaluation of all previous overlays. It does not contain any of the packages added by the current overlay, nor any of the following overlays. This set should be used either to refer to packages you wish to override, to access functions defined in Nixpkgs, or simply if the addition made needs the original unmodified value. For example, the original recipe of `boost` in the above example, comes from `prev`, as well as the `callPackage` function.
```

```nix
pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
  overlays = [
    firstOverlay
    secondOverlay
  ];
}
```

If the `overlays` argument is not passed, these defaults are used:
- If the Nix path entry `<nixpkgs-overlays>` exists, we look for overlays at that path, as described below.

    See the section on `NIX_PATH` in the Nix manual for more details on how to set a value for `<nixpkgs-overlays>.`
- If one of `~/.config/nixpkgs/overlays.nix` and `~/.config/nixpkgs/overlays/` exists, then we look for overlays at that path, as described below. It is an error if both exist.

#### How paths get turned into overlays
- If the path is a file, then the file is imported as a Nix expression and used as the list of overlays.

- If the path is a directory, then we take the content of the directory, order it lexicographically, and attempt to interpret each as an overlay by:

  - Importing the file, if it is a `.nix` file.

  - Importing a top-level `default.nix` file, if it is a directory.

### Applying further overlays on top of an imported Nixpkgs

If you already have an imported Nixpkgs, you can apply further overlays on top using:
```nix

> pkgs.appendOverlays [

Reviewer 2: does this need to be `pkgs = pkgs.appendOverlays` or does it really stand alone?

Author: I think that would be a bit confusing then. I just used `pkgs =` in the beginning to signal that it's an imported Nixpkgs.

Maybe we could do something like this to make it clearer though:
```nix
pkgsModified = pkgs.appendOverlays [ ... ]
```
